GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: the
backlash against the EpiPen
price hike -- why
the drugmaker suddenly decided
to offer a
cheaper generic version of the
lifesaving
allergy medicine.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Monday:
The murder of a mother of four
is the latest
crime in the Windy City -- a
look at the pain
brought on by violence in
Chicago.
GWEN IFILL: And from supporting
al-Qaida to
a life of academia -- how a
former extremist
is joining counterterrorism
efforts from a
perch at George Washington
University.
LORENZO VIDINO, George
Washington University:
This analysis will come from the
inside, firsthand
from somebody who has lived it
and has played
a prominent role in that scene.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
States warned
Turkey today over its military
drive against
Kurdish forces in Northern
Syria.
Turkish tanks and planes are
backing Syrian
rebels in attacks on the Kurds,
who are supported
by the U.S.
Defense Secretary Ash Carter
said the Turks
need to focus on the Islamic
State.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: American
interests are quite clear.
We are -- we, like they, want to
combat ISIL,
and we want -- we're calling on
them all now.
Let's keep our priorities clear
here and helping
them to deconflict, so to speak,
on the battlefield.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Turkish s
President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan insisted today
the Kurdish
group is an arm of the Islamic
State.
Meanwhile, the White House
announced President
Obama will meet with Erdogan on
Sunday at
an economic summit in China.
GWEN IFILL: In Yemen, at least
54 people died
when a suicide truck bomb tore
into a gathering
of military recruits.
The Islamic State group claimed
the attack,
in the southern city of Aden,
near two schools
and a mosque.
Officials said the attacker
drove through
a gate and exploded a pickup
truck.
In addition to the dead, nearly
70 people
were wounded.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thousands of
migrants were
pulled from the sea off Libya
today in a new
surge of sailings.
The mostly African migrants were
trying to
reach Italy.
Rescuers reached dozens of
wooden boats packed
with people, including women and
young children.
Some leaped into the water to
swim toward
rescue ships.
GWEN IFILL: A permanent
cease-fire is now
in effect in Colombia.
The formal halt to hostilities
took place
today, after the government and
leftist FARC
rebels agreed to end 52 years of
warfare.
Colombia will hold a national
referendum on
the peace accord in October.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Brazil's
suspended President
Dilma Rousseff proclaimed her
innocence today
at her impeachment trial.
She said the effort to oust her
on charges
of breaking budget rules amounts
to a coup.
Rousseff choked back tears
during her speech,
and charged that the country's
economic elite
want her overthrown.
DILMA ROUSSEFF, Brazilian
President (through
translator): In the face of
these accusations
against me, I cannot stop
feeling in my mouth
the sharp and bitter taste of
injustice.
Don't expect me to be silent
against cowards,
who in the past used weapons,
and today aimed
to undermine democracy and the
rule of law.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Brazilian
Senate will
vote within days on whether to
remove Rousseff
from office.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration
granted fast-track
approval of a test to detect the
Zika virus.
The blood test made by Roche
will be used
to screen patients who have
symptoms of Zika,
and to screen donated blood.
So far, about 2,500 cases of
Zika have been
reported in the U.S.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the
presidential campaign,
Hillary Clinton's vice chair is
leaving her
husband over reports that he
sent sexual text
messages to another woman again.
Huma Abedin married
then-Congressman Anthony
Weiner in 2010.
But he's repeatedly been accused
of so-called
sexting.
Republican Donald Trump claimed
today that
Weiner had access to government
secrets through
Abedin.
He said it shows Clinton's bad
judgment.
GWEN IFILL: Bank stocks led Wall
Street today,
amid talk of higher interest
rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 107
points to close above 18,500.
The Nasdaq rose 13 points and
the S&P 500
added 11.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And two deaths
of note:
The Latin music world mourned
today for Juan
Gabriel, Mexico's top-selling
singer-songwriter.
He died of a heart attack on
Sunday.
Gabriel's ballads about love and
heartbreak
often paired with a full
mariachi band were
widely popular throughout Latin
America and
with Spanish speakers in the
U.S. Juan Gabriel
was 66 years old.
GWEN IFILL: And actor Gene
Wilder died last
night at his home in
Connecticut.
He had Alzheimer's disease.
He had major hits in the 1960s
and 1970s with
"The Producers," Blazing
Saddles," and "Young
Frankenstein."
And he was the lead in the 1971
version of
"Willy Wonka and the Charlie
Factory."
GENE WILDER, Actor (singing):
There is no
life I know to compare with pure
imagination.
Living there, you will be free,
if you truly
wish to be.
Living there, you will be free,
if you truly
wish to be.
GWEN IFILL: Gene Wilder was 83
years old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
EpiPen goes generic, the role
social media
played in the price drop; we
examine another
violent and murderous weekend in
Chicago;
George Washington University's
new hire, a
convicted extremist; and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: Drugmaker Mylan has
been under
heavy fire for its soaring price
hikes for
EpiPens, the lifesaving
necessity for those
with serious allergic reactions.
Its price has skyrocketed to as
much as $600
for a set of two.
At first, Mylan offered
financial assistance
to customers, but after mounting
pressure,
the company said it now will
release a generic
a version for half the price.
To give us some perspective on
how this case
is different, Stephen
Schondelmeyer studies
this closely at the University
of Minnesota,
and Andrew Pollack covers
pharmaceuticals
for The New York Times.
Gentlemen, welcome.
Andrew Pollack, I want to start
with you and
ask you to explain just
basically, what's
the difference here?
What's the big deal between a
generic EpiPen
and the kind that this company
has been producing
and selling at such a markup?
ANDREW POLLACK, The New York
Times: Well,
it's actually quite a bit
confusing.
The products are exactly the
same.
It's the same product.
However, they are calling one
version now
a generic.
It will have a different package
on it.
It won't say EpiPen, and they
will be selling
it for half the list price of
the branded
product.
GWEN IFILL: Has that ever
happened before?
ANDREW POLLACK: Well,
pharmaceutical companies,
brand-name pharmaceutical
companies often
do introduce their own generic
version of
their own drug.
It's called an authorized
generic.
This is done once an outside
generic company
comes into the market.
This allows them to keep some of
the sales,
rather than having all their
sales being lost
to the outside generic company.
What is unusual here is that
Mylan doesn't
have an immediate genetic
competitor for the
EpiPen.
GWEN IFILL: So they're basically
competing
against public relations at this
point.
Stephen Schondelmeyer, how did a
product that
cost as little as $100 in 2007
rise to $600
today?
STEPHEN SCHONDELMEYER,
University of Minnesota:
Well, it did that because the
marketplace
doesn't have any regulation,
either government
regulation or market regulation,
that holds
that down.
And, in fact, this product that
-- at a self-insured
employer I work with, it cost
them $100 for
this product in 2011, and today
is costing
them $730.
That dramatic increase just
isn't seen.
And now they're calling it a
generic in name.
But it's not a generic, meaning
an independent
economic decision-maker choosing
to compete
with the price of the brand
name.
So we won't see this behave like
a normal
generic in the market either.
GWEN IFILL: And even if it's
half the price,
it will be still around $300,
which is still
more than it was just a short
time ago, right?
STEPHEN SCHONDELMEYER: Sure,
it's more than
$200 than it was not too long
ago.
This is sort of like if your
child happens
to get kidnapped, and the
kidnappers call
you and say we will cut the
ransom in half,
so you're going to save half the
money.
I'm not sure you would call that
a savings.
GWEN IFILL: Andrew Pollack, how
did this study
get so much attention?
It feels like we weren't talking
about this
at all a couple of weeks ago,
and the numbers
were just as high then.
ANDREW POLLACK: Yes, I think
it's partly the
back-to-school season is the
peak buying season
for these products.
This year, you had many parents
buy more than
in the past, having high
deductible insurance
plans, where, having not met
their deductibles,
they had to pay the entire
price.
This started spreading on social
media, and
a big furor arose.
GWEN IFILL: So, social media was
the driving
force behind this furor, this
uprising, as
it were?
ANDREW POLLACK: Yes, we -- my
colleague Tara
had an article on this a couple
of days ago.
GWEN IFILL: Tara Parker-Pope,
right.
Stephen Schondelmeyer, I want to
ask you a
little bit about how this could
have been
avoided.
Could this, for instance -- the
first thing
that Mylan did was offer coupons
to reduce
the price.
Now, today, they have talked
about making
available a generic version.
Is there anything other thing
they could have
done to bring this price down,
or was this
simply a force of the markets?
STEPHEN SCHONDELMEYER: Well, I
think Mylan
could have avoided raising it so
dramatically
in the first place.
This is a product they have been
raising 9.9
percent at a time for two or
three times a
year.
And then in the last two years,
they started
raising it 14.9 percent at a
time for one
or two or three times a year.
The marketplace isn't going up
that rapidly
in terms of inflation, and most
people and
their resources don't go up that
much.
And then they come back and say,
well, this
is covered by insurance, so what
are people
worried about?
Well, nobody -- the insurance
company doesn't
pay for this drug.
The insurance company bills
somebody for the
drug and pays pharmacies for it,
but the insurance
company just processes
transactions.
So, premiums for insurance are
out-of-pocket
costs also, and they seem to
have ignored
that.
GWEN IFILL: Well, you mentioned
the insurance
companies and the high
deductibles.
Andrew Pollack, you mentioned it
as well.
How much is this driven -- the
company says
this is driven in part by the
high-deductible
health care plans and that is
where the problem
lies, not the pricing structure
they create
for the drug.
ANDREW POLLACK: Well, this has
been sort of
a perennial battle between the
pharmaceutical
companies, not just Mylan, and
the insurers,
each blaming the other.
But, in defense of the insurance
companies,
I mean, they say they have to
take some measures
because the price keeps going
up.
And it's part of the playbook of
all the drug
companies, especially those with
high-priced
drugs, to try to cushion the
consumer and,
you know, bill the insurance
company.
GWEN IFILL: This does seem like
we're kind
of chasing our tails here.
There is one -- there is the
price, which
drives the insurance, which
drives the price,
and caught in the middle of all
this is the
person who's trying to make use
of the drug.
So, Stephen Schondelmeyer, let
me ask you
something about why this one.
We have heard lots of talk
before, and on
this program, we have talked
about the high
cost of pharmaceuticals.
Is it because this is something
which is used
for children, and that has
gotten people angry
in a different way?
STEPHEN SCHONDELMEYER: Well, I
think partly
because it's used for children
and also because
this is literally a drug about
life and death.
If you don't have it, there's a
high probability
a patient could die without
access to this
drug.
Also, this is a drug that you
have to have
on hand to prevent a problem, so
the patient
may have to have one or two
doses at home,
one at their cabin up north, one
or two doses
at school, and a school may have
40 or 50
EpiPens.
And, technically, right now, the
nurse can't
use one patient's EpiPen for
another patient.
So we may need to look at some
alternative
policies of how these are used
at schools,
much like we have with the
Naloxone, that
these become readily available,
and they could
have a supply at the school on
hand, and use
it for whoever needs it at the
time, rather
than each patient having to have
one.
GWEN IFILL: So, this is about so
much more
than price.
Professor Stephen Schondelmeyer
at the University
of Minnesota and Andrew Pollack
of The New
York Times, thank you both very
much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Across the
country, students
are heading back to school.
As on many campuses, today is
also the first
day of class at George
Washington University.
This summer, a think tank at the
school made
one of the most unique hires in
academia.
The "NewsHour" has a broadcast
exclusive interview
with a man who was once
convicted of terrorism-related
charges, and is now a researcher
on campus.
I caught up with Jesse Curtis
Morton recently.
This is Jesse Curtis Morton.
In 2010, he went by another
name, Younus Abdullah
Muhammad.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON, George
Washington University:
We will fight you and destroy
you if we have
to, but we prefer that you come
home and pack
it up.
Stop killing our innocent men,
women and children
overseas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Born in the
U.S., he grew
up in Pennsylvania and New
Jersey, but Morton
became a Muslim extremist.
This was him on the streets of
New York.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: There will
be no peace
with Israel until Israel is in
pieces.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Morton also
helped found
Revolution Muslim, a Web site
that the FBI
says encouraged Muslims to
support Osama bin
Laden, al-Qaida and other
violent jihadi groups.
The Web site threatened violence
against the
creators of the Comedy Central
show "South
Park" for a 2010 cartoon
depicting the Prophet
Mohammed.
In 2012, Morton was sentenced to
more than
11-and-a-half years in jail for
using the
Internet to threaten bodily
harm.
But here we are four years
later.
He's a free man with a
decent-paying job at
a George Washington University
think tank
in the nation's capital.
Morton is out of jail early
because he cooperated
with authorities in the U.S. and
overseas.
He worked undercover to gather
intelligence
on those who still trusted the
man they saw
in those videos.
He helped train law enforcement
to recognize
people on the path he was on,
and helped analyze
the behavior of suspected
terrorists with
insights only someone like him
could have.
You're on camera now.
Your face is going to be out
there.
And you're going to be walking
around a college
campus, as someone who has been
convicted
of supporting al-Qaida.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's 10,000
sets of parents
who might be a little concerned
that someone
with a target on their back
might be walking
around on the same campus as
their students.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: Well, there
has been
an extensive security plan put
in place by
a very competent security team
at G.W.
And we have assessed the risk
with the law
enforcement community, federal,
local, and
some state agencies.
And there is very, very, very
little risk
at this point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Getting to
this point, Morton
says, has been a long road
through radicalization
and then de-radicalization.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: I came from
a very tumultuous
childhood, where there was very
severe abuse.
And when I reached out to my
society and tried
to get assistance to stop that
abuse, the
school, my family, and the
society around
me didn't prevent it.
And so, at a very young age, I
rejected American
culture and the American way of
life, so to
say, and sought a new identity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Not to
discount the abuse
that you went through, but lots
of kids live
through child abuse.
They don't go out and build Web
sites supporting
Osama bin Laden.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: Well, it's
a common denominator
with regard to radicalization
processes.
When we study
pre-radicalization, we
oftentimes
see trauma, we see criminality,
we see that
the radical or the violent
extremist interpretation
of Islam attracts people with
some degree
of baggage.
It doesn't mean that I justify
it.
It doesn't mean that I blame
what I became
on what I went through.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A runaway at
16, he was
a hippie following the Grateful
Dead.
Drug dealing landed him in jail,
and there,
he says, began his slow
introduction to Islam.
There are people who convert to
Islam all
over the world every day, don't
end up where
you are.
How's that?
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: I was a
radical and extremely
political before I adopted
Islam.
So, I think I naturally
gravitated toward
the politicized interpretation
of Islam.
And from there, I identified
with the sort
of anti-imperialist message that
was being
promoted by al-Qaida.
HARI SREENIVASAN: His thoughts
were becoming
progressively more radical.
In 2006, at a Muslim Day Parade
in New York,
he happened upon the extremist
Muslim Thinkers
Society.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: I glanced
to my left
and saw the black flag, what we
call the black
flag of ISIS now, but has a much
longer history,
and saw the movement or the
group promoting
the images of dead children on
the streets
and selling T-shirts that said
"I love jihad"
in Arabic.
I immediately walked up to them
and told them
I wanted to join them.
And very soon, I was climbing
their ranks
and becoming one of their
primary speakers
on the streets of Manhattan,
Jackson Heights,
Queens, protests outside of
Israeli embassies,
et cetera, et cetera.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Around this
time, Morton
enrolled at Columbia
University's School of
International and Public
Affairs, earning
a master's degree in
international affairs.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: Sort of
sort of like
I was living dual lives.
I was Jesse Morton in school,
and I was Younus
Abdullah Muhammad, leader of
Revolution Muslim,
outside of school.
And I never combined the two, so
people didn't
really know what I was doing
while I was at
Columbia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But the Ivy
League education
did nothing to moderate Morton's
world view.
In 2007, he and a few other
radicals started
the Revolution Muslim Web site.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: At the
time, online radicalization
was becoming easier because of
the Web 2.0,
the relatively nascent platforms
like YouTube
and chat rooms.
Online forums, that was the
platform back
then.
And you could see that the
number of hits
that were on the Web site were
growing and
mounting, so we knew that we
were having an
enhanced impact.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
now-defunct Web site
posted calls for jihad and
excerpts from "Inspire,"
the al-Qaida magazine.
Lorenzo Vidino is the director
of the Program
on Extremism at George
Washington's Center
for Cyber and Homeland Security.
It was his idea to hire Morton.
LORENZO VIDINO, George
Washington University:
His Web site was one of the
first -- I would
say the first Web site in the
United States
that spread the message of
al-Qaida, of other
groups.
And it was sort of the go-to
place for wannabe
jihadists in the United States.
It is no coincidence that a
variety of individuals
who have gone down the
trajectory of radicalization
and eventually become terrorists
were at some
point in one way or the other
involved in
the Web site.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In 2009,
Morton moved to
Morocco.
While running the Web site, he
taught English
and standardized test prep.
Ironically, moving to Morocco
didn't harden
his views toward jihad.
Quite the opposite.
Meeting a new generation of
students, Morton
says, made him begin rethinking
things.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: And in my
conversations
with my students, I realized
that the vision,
the utopian vision of the
Islamic State that
I held, the general,
particularly from amongst
the millennial population,
didn't have any
desire for such a society.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In May of
2011, Morton was
arrested in Morocco on a U.S.
criminal complaint,
charged with communicating
threats online.
After five months in a Moroccan
prison, he
was flown back to the U.S. to
face trial.
His de-radicalization began on
the plane ride
home.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: And the
agent that initiated
communication on that plane
asked me what
I wanted to be called, Jesse
Morton or Younus
Abdullah Muhammad.
And, interestingly enough, I
responded Jesse
Morton.
And it shocked me too.
And over time, I learned that my
identity
as Younus Abdullah Muhammad was
an effort
to kill a person that I hated.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He eventually
received a
sentence of 11-and-a-half years.
In jail, he was interviewed by
counterterror
officials.
Those interactions, he says,
further changed
his world view.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: I had
interaction with
a very intelligent and a very
sincere female
FBI agent.
And over the course of a very
long debriefing
process, the world view that I
once held that
held them to be enemies of Islam
and engaged
in a conspiracy to prevent Islam
from establishing
itself politically was, in fact,
false.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Soon, Morton
says he began
helping counterterrorism
officials in their
investigations.
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: We
generated significant
rewards from my cooperation,
some of which
involved international activity.
At the time, the Syrian civil
war was heating
up, and more jihadist groups
were appearing.
And several people from the West
were joining
them.
I can't talk about specifics of
particular
cases, but we also yielded
domestic investigatory
gains.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lorenzo Vidino
thinks Morton
will make a valuable
contribution to research
on terrorism and radicalization.
LORENZO VIDINO: Most of the
analysis of radicalization
comes from outsiders, from
people who are
just studying it.
This analysis will come from the
inside, firsthand
from somebody who has lived it
and has played
a prominent role in that scene.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's also
going to be
several people watching this
that say, how
do we know he's telling the
truth?
How can we trust him?
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: The
prosecuting attorney
on my case advocated for my
hiring at G.W.
And some of the biggest
high-profile individuals
of the counterterrorism
community have also
vouched for me.
And so I will prove that to the
public as
time goes on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What if
somebody doesn't
want to believe that and puts
your life at
risk?
JESSE CURTIS MORTON: If I am
willing to sacrifice
in the past so much to promote
such a disgusting
ideology, then I think that, if
I'm sincere
in my reform, I should be as
equally dedicated
and equally passionate about
trying to repair
some of the damage that I have
done.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the PBS
"NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan in
Washington.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the PBS
"NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan in
Washington.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Politics Monday
looks ahead to Donald Trump's
immigration
speech and some final primary
elections; plus,
a story of friendship and
hardship while growing
up in Brooklyn.
But, first: More than 80 people
have been
killed in Chicago this month.
And more than 400 have been shot
in August.
It's part of a weekly and even
daily pattern
of violence plaguing big and
often impoverished
sections of the city.
So far, it's a crisis that has
eluded major
solutions.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: One of Chicago's
bloodiest weekends
this year ended the city's
deadliest month
in 20 years.
Among the victims, Nykea
Aldridge, a cousin
of basketball star Dwyane Wade,
now with the
Chicago Bulls.
Police Superintendent Eddie
Johnson:
EDDIE JOHNSON, Chicago Police
Superintendent:
She wasn't aware that her short
life would
stand as an example for what is
a clear failure
in the criminal justice system
here in Chicago.
JOHN YANG: Aldridge was caught
in crossfire
as she pushed one of her four
young children
in a stroller near a school on
the city's
South Side.
The surge in gun killings has
largely been
concentrated there and on the
West Side.
Two brothers, Darwin and Derren
Sorrells,
are now charged with
first-degree murder in
Aldridge's killing.
Both are convicted felons on
parole, and police
said Derren Sorrells is a gang
member.
EDDIE JOHNSON: This
reprehensible act of violence
is an example of why we need to
change the
way we treat habitual offenders
in the city
of Chicago.
When will enough be enough?
JOHN YANG: Gun violence has
fueled a jump
in Chicago homicides this year
to more than
449, nearly as many as all of
last year.
More than 2,300 shootings have
been reported
since January.
And police have seized nearly
6,000 illegal
guns, roughly one every hour.
So far this year, Chicago has
seen more homicides
than New York and Los Angeles
combined, even
though both are larger.
This weekend may have been
especially bad,
but in many ways, it is no
different than
many other summer weekends in
Chicago.
We are joined from Chicago by
Jedidiah Brown.
He's a community organizer who's
seen this
violence firsthand, president of
Chicago Life,
a community advocacy group.
And by Lori Lightfoot.
She's the president of the
Chicago Police
Board and the head of the Police
Accountability
Task Force.
They join us, both, from
Chicago.
Thanks for being with us.
Ms. Lightfoot, I would like to
start with
you.
This has been a problem for so
many years
in Chicago.
We have seen evolving tactics
and strategies
by the police, by community
activists.
Is there anything you can point
to, from your
point of view, that's a sign of
hope, that's
a sign of progress?
LORI LIGHTFOOT, President,
Chicago Police
Board: Well, I think one of the
most important
things is, this issue of
violence is now not
something that's isolated to
particular neighborhoods
in Chicago, but it's really a
conversation
that has captured the
imagination of people
across the city.
And I think shining a light on
it and transparency
around that is something that's
very important.
And the reason for that is that
we have a
lot of great, smart, committed
people here
in Chicago.
And I think bringing people
together to take
a fresh look at some of these
issues is going
to be vitally important to
really making an
appreciable difference in what's
happening
in Chicago, and also not just
thinking about
this from a law enforcement
perspective, that
the issues that I think are the
root causes
of the violence that we see in
many of these
neighborhoods are not something
that's going
to be solved purely with a law
enforcement
answer.
We have got to use what I would
call soft
power.
There has got to be investment
in neighborhoods.
We have got to make sure that
we're giving
our young people alternatives to
this life
on the streets.
And we have got to keep talking
about the
importance of the sanctity of
life.
But we also absolutely have to
focus on the
proliferation of illegal guns
that really
is changing and making more
difficult the
issue of solving these violence
issues.
JOHN YANG: I want to get back to
that gun
issue, but, Pastor Brown, you're
on the streets.
You talk to these young people.
You see what's going on.
What do you think about what Ms.
Lightfoot
has just said about this -- sort
of the use
of soft power; it's not just a
police issue?
JEDIDIAH BROWN, President,
Chicago Life: I
think those are great talking
points, but
I'm very -- I saw a young man
shot this morning.
Yes, the conversation is being
had across
the city, but the conversation
is people waking
up to the fact that this mayoral
administration
has failed our city, that there
is a lot of
dysfunction in our neighborhoods
because there
is no representation, there is
no resources,
there is no activities.
And there is just a lot of talk.
And so I hear what she's saying,
but the reality
of it is that it hasn't gotten
any better.
And I'm really praying that the
man I saw
shot this morning on my block
where I live
is going to live.
JOHN YANG: You talk in your
Twitter feed about
sitting -- Pastor Brown, sitting
in your living
room hearing shots and sirens at
night, but
you say you still love the city.
JEDIDIAH BROWN: Yes, I love
Chicago.
I'm not going to give up on it,
even seeing
the young man shot this morning.
Like I said, the conversation,
as a resident,
we recognize that City Hall and
the police
department, that they could do
more to empower
the residents, but they simply
just won't
do it, because I don't think
that they frankly
care.
But I, as a resident, I am not
giving to give
up to violence and to the
misconceptions of
what's going on, because this is
not all gang
violence that is happening in
our city.
JOHN YANG: Ms. Lightfoot, he
talks about the
feeling that the city leaders
don't care about
the South Side.
LORI LIGHTFOOT: I just think
that's wrong.
Look, there is more that can be
done.
There's no question about that.
But what we need to be working
towards is
a place where people who are
directly affected
by the violence, people of other
-- of good
will across the city, elected
officials and
the police department are coming
together
in a space where we can work
together towards
a solution.
The people who are literally
captives in their
neighborhoods by this violence,
the rhetoric,
with pointing fingers back and
forth, that
doesn't help solve the problem
that they are
living through every single day.
And while I respect the pastor's
opinion,
I think that what we need to be
thinking about
is, how we can move forward
together as a
community to solve this issue as
a community?
It can't be top-down.
It can't be only the police
department doing
it, without respectful
engagement with the
community.
But it has got to be something
that all of
us roll our sleeves up on and
work towards
solutions.
And I think the language that we
use in talking
about these issues is also just
as important
as the specific actions that we
take.
And I think we need to move
towards positive
solutions that are at multiple
tiers, with
all the relevant stakeholders
rolling up their
sleeves and working hard to try
to address
this issue.
As I said, it's not an issue
that the police
department can solve by itself.
It absolutely has a role to
play, but so do
our federal law enforcement
partners, as well
as the faith community, the
people that are
out there in those
neighborhoods.
And we have got to create a
space where those
conversations can be had.
JOHN YANG: Pastor Brown, you
have said that
you think Ms. Lightfoot has nice
talking points,
but what would you do?
What would you want to see done
to achieve
your goals?
JEDIDIAH BROWN: So, what I'm
doing now is,
I'm actually organizing my
neighborhood to
take its safety in its own
hands, trying to
get residents back to the days
of community
watch and community patrols.
I do want to point out that,
yes, it's going
to take everybody, all hands on
deck.
And so, like, even with Lori,
who I met when
she was appointed by the mayor,
and we -- they
made a commitment to us to
working with us
after the Laquan McDonald
surfaced, and we
have not heard anything from
them once they
realized we wasn't just going to
provide them
cover.
But we have been since then
working very hard
to organize the neighborhood and
to let people
know that they have to take
public safety
into their own hands and the
cavalry isn't
coming.
And we have heard nothing from
City Hall,
nothing to help us.
And they know who are the ones
out here that
are doing the real work.
And they know that we're out
here consistently
when victims are shot.
So, we're now trying to find
something to
replace the trauma.
When someone is shot in the
neighborhood,
it creates a very intense
feeling of sorrow
and grief and wanting to give
up.
And now we're just -- we're
getting ready
to do pop-ups in the
neighborhood to infuse
hope in places that have been
robbed by gun
violence.
And we're having to do it on our
own.
JOHN YANG: Pastor Jedidiah
Brown, Loretta
Lynch, unfortunately, this is
not going to
be the last time we're going to
talk about
this.
But, unfortunately, we're out of
time for
now.
Thanks for joining us.
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Thank you.
JEDIDIAH BROWN: No problem.
GWEN IFILL: As the summer winds
down, the
presidential campaign is only
gathering steam,
as candidates and voters sort a
through the
pluses and the minuses of
immigration reform,
questions about the Clinton
Foundation, appeals
to African-American voters, and
a dramatically
altered general election map.
It's Politics Monday, so we turn
to Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report and
Stuart Rothenberg
of The Washington Post.
Welcome to you back.
Happy Monday.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Thank
you.
STUART ROTHENBERG, The
Washington Post: Thank
you.
GWEN IFILL: Let's start 3,000
feet up and
talk about the map.
One of the things that's
different in this
election, among all the things
that are different
in this election, is that the
map feels different
than it has in the past.
The states that Republicans
think are slam
dunks aren't necessarily slam
dunks.
Same for the Democrats?
AMY WALTER: Well, the bad news
for Republicans
is that the states that look
less likely to
be in their traditional lane are
the states
that Republicans traditionally
hold on to,
or at least in the most recent
elections have.
If you look at the states, just
look at the
polling right now, there isn't
one state that
Hillary Clinton is trailing in
that Barack
Obama didn't win or that Mitt
Romney won.
So, she's winning in all the
states that Barack
Obama carried.
And she's also doing better than
Obama in
some of those states that he
didn't carry,
specifically in 2012, like North
Carolina.
But now we're talking about
Arizona, we're
talking about Missouri, we're
talking about
Georgia.
Even South Carolina has become
more competitive.
These are states that I think
are still a
reach for Hillary Clinton, but
the fact that
they're even on the map makes it
different.
And this is the big irony,
right?
It was that Donald Trump was
going to come
in and shake up the map.
He was the one that was going to
make all
these changes.
There is not one state that
Barack Obama carried
that he's doing well.
GWEN IFILL: The map has been
shaken, but not
to his advantage.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes, I don't
think the
map has changed that
dramatically.
GWEN IFILL: Really?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes.
I still use the 2012
Obama-Romney race as
the baseline.
And I think Amy is exactly right
that there
are a couple of Republican
states that now
look to be flirting with Hillary
Clinton.
There are a couple of Democratic
states that
Donald Trump is making a run at,
particularly
Nevada and Iowa.
But, otherwise, the rest of the
map looks
consistent.
Obviously, there are two swing
states that
look to be off the table, at
least for the
moment.
That would be Colorado and
Virginia, where
former Secretary Clinton is
doing quite well.
GWEN IFILL: OK, so let's talk
about what the
candidates have been talking
about and how
that fits into this discussion
about the map,
which is, let's talk about
Donald Trump.
He is going to give a speech on
Wednesday,
he has said -- he said this
before -- on immigration.
And in the last two weeks, it
seems as if
he has shifted.
Has he shifted on immigration?
Softened, I think is the word he
used.
AMY WALTER: I guess that's the
question that
we're all wondering, is, what is
happening?
GWEN IFILL: We don't know.
AMY WALTER: I'm of many minds on
this issue.
The first says, there is nothing
new or different
about a candidate after a
primary softening
and moving to the center.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
AMY WALTER: Right.
There is nothing new about that.
But, usually, a candidate does
that in like
May or June or maybe at their
convention,
which he obviously didn't do.
The other thing is, if you're
going to move
on a centerpiece of your
campaign, you should
probably have an actual message
on that, know
what that policy is.
Neither he nor his campaign
seems to understand
what that is.
The final thing is, making a
change on the
policy, I don't think, is the
real issue.
It's the temperament that's the
issue.
The wall is a bigger issue
because of the
temperament.
GWEN IFILL: How many minds are
you of?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Amy said that
she is of
many minds on this issue.
Well, Donald Trump is of many
minds on what
his position is on this issue.
(LAUGHTER)
STUART ROTHENBERG: There has
been buzz in
the last 24 hours that Trump is
going to come
out on Wednesday and talk about
securing the
border first, and then
addressing people who
are here without papers.
I think he has softened -- he
has tried to
soften his message a little bit
by talking
more about a humane treatment.
GWEN IFILL: He has used that
word more than
once, yes.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes.
And six months ago, a year ago,
it was -- he
never seemed to be concerned
with how people
are being treated.
Just get them the hell out.
So, I think that's a difference.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
Hillary Clinton's
sore spot, the thing that never
seems to go
away, which are questions about
her truthfulness,
her honesty, her e-mails.
And in this poll from Monmouth
University
that came out today, voters were
asked, do
you think Hillary Clinton gave
special treatment
to big donors of the Clinton
Foundation when
she was secretary of state, or
did she do
nothing out of the ordinary in
the way she
treated them?
And a whole lot of people say
she gave special
treatment.
But in that same poll, she's
leading pretty
well nationally.
So?
AMY WALTER: That's the theme of
this campaign,
right?
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: Stu and I have
talked to and listened
to many voters saying, this is
the lesser
of two evils campaign.
People are not excited about
their choice.
They're just picking the
candidate that they
think is the least bad.
And perceptions of Hillary
Clinton are pretty
well settled.
They don't think she's
trustworthy.
They're not happy about this,
but when they
look at their other choice right
now, they
feel even less secure.
GWEN IFILL: These choices don't
happen in
a vacuum.
STUART ROTHENBERG: No.
And, look, they're not going to
feel that
she's trustworthy between now
and then.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And that's a
problem.
But, as you point out, in the
Monmouth poll,
she was ahead by seven points.
So, this is a case of, I have to
choose which
candidate I hate least, at least
with the
voters.
GWEN IFILL: Does that mean that
she's safe
in just assuming that she
doesn't need to
worry about questions like that?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, any
candidate ought
to worry all the time, and
campaign managers
do.
Look, I think that most of the
negatives for
both candidates, frankly, are
already baked
in the cake.
Having said that, if you're
Hillary Clinton's
campaign, you don't want the
topic of the
day to be her problems either
with the foundation
or with e-mails.
You want to be discussing
different kinds
of things.
So, I think, unless something
really new comes
out and changes the narrative,
that we probably
have the race that we have now
for a while.
AMY WALTER: I completely agree.
GWEN IFILL: I was on vacation
last week watching
with great interest, arm's
length, as Donald
Trump came out repeatedly and
made a real
pitch to African-American
voters.
You talk about, these are the
things that
usually happen in the spring.
And Hillary Clinton pushed back
as well.
I got the distinct impression
they weren't
talking to African American...
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Stu is laughing at
me -- African-American
voters.
Amy, what was your impression?
AMY WALTER: Yes.
My impression was, the challenge
right now
for the Trump campaign -- sorry
-- is to consolidate
Republican voters.
I mean, part of the reason he's
behind seven,
eight points in some of these
polls is not
because he's losing -- yes, he's
losing independents,
but because he's losing
Republicans.
Talking to these suburban swing
voters who
have distanced themselves from
Trump, trying
to bring them back by saying,
he's really
not as bigoted as he may come
across.
Really, he's softer, he's more
humane.
GWEN IFILL: And, in fact, it's
Hillary Clinton
who is bigoted.
AMY WALTER: It's Hillary Clinton
who has the
problem.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Boy, that is
a really tough
message to deliver.
Hillary Clinton, with her
record, her support
in the minority community,
particularly the
African-American community, the
way they view
her, calling her a bigot, I
don't think they're
going to accept that.
And, look, the Republicans do
have an opportunity
here to make the case to
Latinos, to African-Americans,
to all minorities about the
Republican agenda
and free market and all that.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
STUART ROTHENBERG: But Donald
Trump is not
the guy to make that argument.
GWEN IFILL: All right, Stu, we
will see.
Stu Rothenberg of The Rothenberg
Political
Report, Washington Post, Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report, thank you
both very
much.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Where do you fit in
the political
spectrum compared to other
voters this election?
Developed with Pew Research
Center, we have
updated our Political Party
Quiz.
Take it now on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: a
novelist and poet who writes for
young people
and adults, and a new work of
fiction that
looks back at a world she knew
well.
Jeffrey Brown makes a new
addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf from
Brooklyn, New York.
JACQUELINE WOODSON, Author,
"Another Brooklyn":
The basketball courts have
moved.
They used to be along here.
But they came along and
renovated the park.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did you come back
up here when
you were writing?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: I did.
I wanted to talk about walking
through it.
I really wanted to get this park
on the page.
JEFFREY BROWN: The park is in
the Brooklyn
neighborhood of Bushwick, where
author Jacqueline
Woodson came of age in the
1970s.
Her new novel, set in that time
and place,
is about four teenage friends,
as Woodson
writes, growing up girl in the
city, with
big aspirations, but also
suffering terrible
losses along the way.
It's called "Another Brooklyn."
JACQUELINE WOODSON: I knew that
it was going
to be an story about friendship
and the way
people come together and
eventually come apart.
So, I just went in.
And, of course, having grown up
girl in Brooklyn
myself, it was -- it was -- I
had some information
that I needed to tell this
story.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you wanted to
tell this
because?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: I don't
think it's a story
that's really been told in that
way that we
talk intimately about the
complexity of what
it means to grow up, not only
girl, but to
grow up a girl of color, and
grow up specifically
an African-American girl, or a
Caribbean-American
girl, in the city.
I had the main character of
Bushwick, which
is a character I knew well
because I grew
up there, but I wanted...
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean the
place as a character?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Yes, the
place.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you felt that
from the
beginning?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Yes, yes, I
knew that
Bushwick was going to be the
main character,
that everything was going to
revolve in this
neighborhood.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Bushwick of
the 1970s that
Woodson describes had more than
its share
of problems and dangers,
especially for young
girls.
Drugs were everywhere.
White flight was well under way.
But she also recalls a vibrant
place, with
young people, like her
characters, who aspired
to and achieved great things.
JACQUELINE WOODSON: It was very
much alive,
and I wanted to capture that,
especially given
how people think of Bushwick as
this place
that's newly discovered.
And every time I hear that, I'm
just like,
no, there were people here
before then.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you fear that
that history
has been lost?
Is that part of what is going on
here?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Yes, I think
it can get
lost.
But I think writers are the
history keepers,
right?
We're the ones who are bearing
witness to
what's going on in the world.
And I feel like it's our job to
put that down
on paper, and put it out into
the world, so
that it can be remembered.
JEFFREY BROWN: Woodson told her
own story
of growing up in South Carolina
and then Brooklyn
in her 2014 free verse memoir
"Brown Girl
Dreaming," where she describes
how she dreamed
of being a writer at the age of
7.
Why a writer?
JACQUELINE WOODSON: When I was a
kid, I got
in trouble for lying a lot, and
I had a teacher
say, instead of lying, write it
down, because
if you write it down, it's not a
lie anymore;
it's fiction.
So I was, like, wait.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ah, that's your
definition
of fiction.
(LAUGHTER)
JACQUELINE WOODSON: Yes.
It's legitimized.
I was like, wait, there's a way
out of this.
But, also, I just loved the
physical act of
writing.
And when I learned to write my
name for the
first time, there was such a
power to realizing
that you put letters together,
and they make
words, and you put words
together, and they
make sentences, and sentences
make paragraphs.
And that was magic to me, that
all you needed
was this pencil and a notebook,
and you were
on your way.
JEFFREY BROWN: On her way to a
life of writing
and many honors.
Woodson is author of more than
30 books for
children and young adults.
Her memoir won the National Book
Award for
Young People's Literature.
The new novel is her first for
adults in 20
years.
Woodson still lives in Brooklyn
in a different
neighborhood.
And when we returned with her to
Bushwick,
she kept running into old
friends, this one
in front of her childhood family
home.
Like much of the neighborhood,
it's been renovated.
Brooklyn itself is another
Brooklyn now, gentrified,
with whites moving back in.
Woodson says she always wants to
tell the
bigger story, beyond her
characters.
JACQUELINE WOODSON: It's always
been me in
the context of the bigger world,
in the context
of the greater good, in the
context of what
is this story trying to say, and
why is it
trying to say it, and what does
it mean to
someone outside of this
experience?
So, even as I'm creating the
characters, and
putting them on the page, and
having them
move around, I'm thinking, what
does it mean?
When I put four black girls on
the page, what
is it going to mean when it goes
out into
the world?
How are they going to be
represented?
digested?
So -- and what is my
responsibility in all
of that?
JEFFREY BROWN: Jacqueline
Woodson now has
another responsibility.
Last year, the Poetry Foundation
named her
young people's poet laureate.
From Brooklyn, New York, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can see
Jacqueline Woodson
read her poem "Bushwick History
Lesson" on
our Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And we will be back
in a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Tuesday, we visit Iceland and
learn why
some residents of the island
nation want fewer
On Tuesday, we visit Iceland and
learn why
some residents of the island
nation want fewer
tourists to visit.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all
of us here at
the "PBS NewsHour," thank you,
and good night.